PART II
CITIZENSHIP
5. Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.—At the
commencement of this Constitution, every person who has his domicile in the
territory of India and—
(a) who was born in the territory of India; or
(b) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India; or
(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for
not less than five years immediately preceding such commencement,
shall be a citizen of India.
6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to
India from Pakistan.—Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who
has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in
Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this
Constitution if—
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born
in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally
enacted); and
(b)(i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the
territory of India since the date of his migration, or
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of India
by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of the
Dominion of India on an application made by him therefore to such
officer before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and
manner prescribed by that Government:
Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident
in the territory of India for at least six months immediately preceding the date
of his application.
4

5

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

7. Rights of citizeship of certain migrants to Pakistan.—
Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a person who has after the first
day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory of India to the territory now
included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India:
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after
having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, has returned to the
territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by
or under the authority of any law and every such person shall for the purposes
of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the territory of India
after the nineteenth day of July, 1948.
8. Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing
outside India.—Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person who or
either of whose parents or any of whose grand-parents was born in India as
defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted), and who
is ordinarily residing in any country outside India as so defined shall be deemed
to be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the
diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is for the
time being residing on an application made by him therefor to such diplomatic
or consular representative, whether before or after the commencement of this
Constitution, in the form and manner prescribed by the Government of the
Dominion of India or the Government of India.
9. Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to
be citizens.— No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or be
deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 8, if he has
voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.
10. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.—Every person who is or
is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this
Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament,
continue to be such citizen.
11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.—Nothing
in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of
Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.

