THE STATES IN PART B OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE 

238. The provisions of Part VI shall apply in relation 
to the States specified in Part B of the 
First Schedule as they apply in relation 
to the States specified in Part A of that 
Schedule subject to the following modi- 
fications and omissions, namely : 

(1) For the word "Governor" wherever it occurs in 
the said Part VI, except where it occurs for the second 
time in clause (6) of article 232, the word "Rajpramukh" 
shall be substituted. 

(2) In article 152, for the word and letter "Part A" 
the word and letter "Part B” shall be substituted. 

(3) Articles 155, 156 and 157 shall be omitted. 

(4) In article 158, 

(i) in clause (1), for the words "be appointed" 
the word "becomes" shall be substituted ; 

(ii) for clause (3), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely : 

"(3) The Rajpramukh shall, unless he has 
his own residence in the principal seat 
of Government of the State, be entitled 
without payment of rent to the use of 
an official residence and shall be also 
entitled to such allowances and privileges 
as the President may, by general or 
special order, determine." ; 

(iii) in clause (4), the words "emoluments and" 
shall be omitted. 

(5) In article 159, after the words "seniormost Judge 
of that Court available" the words "or in such other manner 
as may be prescribed in that behalf by the President" 
shall be inserted. 

(6) In article 164, for the proviso to clause (1) the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely : 

"Provided that in the State of Madhya Bharat there 
shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare 
who may in addition be in charge of the 
welfare of the Scheduled Castes and backward 
classes for any other work." 

(7) In article 168, for clause (1) the following clause 
shall be substituted, namely : 

"(1) For every State there shall be a Legislature which 
shall consist of the Rajpramukh and 

(a) in the State of Mysore, two Houses ; 

(b) in other States, one House." 

(8) In article 186, for the words "as are specified in 
the Second Schedule" the words "as the Rajpramukh may 
determine" shall be substituted. 

(9) In article 195, for the words "as were imme- 
diately before the commencement of this Constitution 
applicable in the case of members of the Legislative 
Assembly of the corresponding Province" the words "as 
the Rajpramukh may determine" shall be substituted. 

(10) In clause (3) of article 202 

(i) for sub-clause (a), the following sub-clause 
shall be substituted, namely : 

“(a) the allowances of the Rajpramukh and 
other expenditure relating to his office 
as determined by the President by 
general or special order ;" 

(ii) for sub- clause (f) the following sub-clauses 
shall be substituted, namely : 

“(f) in the case of the State of Travaneore- 
Cochin, a sum of fifty-one lakhs of 
rupees required to be paid annually to 
the Devaswom fund under the covenant 
entered into before the commencement 
of this Constitution by the Rulers of 
the Indian States of Travancore and 
Cochin for the formation of the United 
State of Kerala ; 

(g) any other expenditure declared by this 
Constitution, or by the Legislature of 
the State by law, to be so charged.' 1 

(11) In article 208, for clause (2), the following clause 
shall be substituted, namely : 

"(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules 
of procedure and standing orders in force imme- 
diately before the commencement of this Consti- 
tution with respect to the Legislature for the 
State or, where no House of the Legislature for 
the State existed, the rules of procedure and 
standing orders in force immediately before such 
commencement with respect to the Legislative 
Assembly of such Province as may be specified in 
that behalf by the Rajpramukh of the State, shall 
have effect in relation to the Legislature of the 
State subject to such modifications and adaptations 
as may be made therein by the Speaker of the Legis- 
lative Assembly or the Chairman of the Legislative 
Council, as the case may be." 

(12) In clause (2) of article 214, for the word "Province" 
the words "Indian State" shall be substituted. 

(13) For article 221, the following article shall be sub- 
stituted, namely : 

221. (1) There shall be paid to the 
Judges of each High Court such salaries 
as may be determined by the President 
after consultation with the Rajpramukh. 

(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances 
and to such rights in respect of leave of 
absence and pension as may from time to 
time be determined by or under law made by 
Parliament and, until so determined, to such 
allowances and rights as may be determined by 
the President after consultation with the Raj- 
pramukh : 

Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor 
his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension 
shall be varied to his disadvantage after his 
appointment.” 