FIRST SCHEDULE 

(Articles 1, 4 and 391) 

The States and the territories of India 

PART A
Name 			Territories 
1. Andhra Pradesh... The territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, and the territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.


2. Assam...... The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States and the Assam Tribal Areas, but excluding the terri- tories specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951.
The territory of the State of Bihar shall comprise the territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Bihar or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province, but shall not include the territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 . The territory of the State of West Bengal shall comprise the territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territory of Chandernagore as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 , and also the territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 .


3. Bihar...... The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Bihar or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province. 1. The word and letter" Part. A" omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.
4. Bombay..... The territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 8 of the States Reorgan- isation Act, 1956.
5. Kerala..... The territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 5 of the States Reorgan- isation Act, 1956.
6. Madhya Pradesh... The territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 9 of the States Reorgan- isation Act, 1956.
7. Madras..... The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Madras or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territories specified in section 4 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but excluding the territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 3 and sub- section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, and the territo- ries specified in clause (b) of sub- section (1) of section 5, section 6 and clause (d) of sub- section (1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
8. Mysore..... The territories specified in sub- section (1) of section 7 of the States Reogani- sation Act, 1956.
9. Orissa..... The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Orissa or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province.
10. Punjab..... The territories specified in section 11 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
11. Rajasthan.... The territories specified in section 10 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
12. Uttar Pradesh... The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province known as the United Provinces or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province.
13. West Bengal.... The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province. 



PART B Name Territory 

1. Jammu and Kashmir.. The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir. 



PART C Name Territory 

1. Delhi...... The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner' s Province of Delhi.
2. Himachal Pradesh.. The territories which immediately before the commencement of the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954, were comprised in the States of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur.
3. Manipur..... The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was be- ing administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner' s Province under the name of Manipur.
4. Tripura..... The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was being administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner' s Province under the name of Tripura.
5. The Laccadive, Minic- The territory specified in section 6 of the oy and Admindivi States Reorganisation Act, 1956 ." Islands.


PART D 
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands.